There are two different boot models running on modern pcs.

1. Leagacy BIOS boot (MBR-style)
2. UEFI boot (GPT-style)

Here we will discuss the Leagacy BIOS boot system

The firmware(BIOS) doesn't understand filesystem at all. It only can read the first 512 bytes
of a disk. We call it MASTER BOOT RECORD (MBR). What bios do is , it copies the MBR into 
memory at address 0x7C00 and jumps to it.

Now lets see whats in that 512 bytes.

* 446 bytes : This a part of code. How ever it is not enogh to write a program that can 
understand a file system. So what program here is doing that it stores a bigger code which is
in somewhere else to memory and hands off the control to it. That specific program is able to
understand a file system. 

Now lets talk about where this big program is at. where the 446 byte program points to.

When we create the MBR we create at the very first of the disk. Because BIOS can only read 
the fist 512 bytes of a disk. Then we make out partions. Partition numbers are starting from
1. When we create a partition we need to mention the start point and the end point. Our first
partition usually starts from 1MiB location. It may continue to all space or some range.

Note that first is MBR, then Partition starts from 1MiB. so that between those points there 
is an unused space by anything.

we use that space to put our bigger program that can understand the file system.

There are two fancy names we need to rember in this context. we call that 446 byte program as
stage 1. The program resides in the gap is called stage 1.5.

* 64 bytes : above we talked about the 446 bytes of 512. Lets talk about next 64 bytes now.
it is used for something called 'partition table'. It is table is a datastructure that tell
the bios how our device is divided. it contains starting and ending locations, sizes, and types of each partitions.

It has 4 entries of 16 bytes. Thats is why MBR disks cant have more than 4 primary partitions.

Without this your partition managers cant read the disk properly most of the time. If you 
removed this accidently, you may have to make it again. Otherwise your usb or disk will not
work with a system.

* 2 byte : the remaining 2 bytes of 512 bytes is used for 'signature'. it is a value '0x55AA'. It tell the bios that the divece is bootable.


# Now Lets make a usb that can be bootable with your bios

Here we need tht program 'parted' to make partitions.
Every thing from now on is a super user command

1. first of all we need to make a partition table.

sudo parted /dev/sdX -- mklabel msdos

sudo — run this as admin/root. Needed because writing to a raw disk is a privileged operation.
parted — the program name. It's a command-line partitioning tool
/dev/sdX — this is the whole disk, not a partition. In Linux, disks show up as device files. X may be any letter
-- — just tells parted "everything after this is arguments, not options,"
mklabel msdos — "make a partition label," meaning create a partition table. msdos is the name parted uses for the classic MBR-style table

when making the table. it also take the sapce for whole MBR.

2. Now lets make a parimary partition starts from 1MiB

sudo parted /dev/sdX -- mkpart primary fat32 1MiB 100%

mkpart — "make a partition"
MBR tables support two kinds of partitions: "primary" (up to 4 of them) and "logical" (extra ones nested inside a special primary partition, for when you need more than 4). We just want one normal partition, so: primary.
fat32 — tells parted what filesystem you intend to put here. Note: this doesn't actually format it yet — it just writes a hint into the partition table for other tools to see. You still have to format separately
1MiB 100% — the start and end position of this partition. Start at 1 MiB into the disk (leaving that gap we discussed for GRUB's stage 1.5), and end at 100% (use the rest of the disk).


3. Now we have to assign an active partition flag on partition 1. It is conventional

sudo parted /dev/sdX -- set 1 boot on

set 1 boot on — "on partition number 1, turn on the flag called boot." This is the "active partition" flag some old BIOSes check before they'll even look at a disk. It doesn't do anything technical by itself — it's just a marker/flag some firmware insists on seeing before proceeding.


4. Now we can format the disk and add the file system. The prevoius stepps are also appield in this step

sudo mkfs.vfat -F32 -n UBUNTU /dev/sdX1

mkfs.vfat — "make filesystem, vfat type." This is the actual formatting step — it writes the real FAT32 filesystem data structures onto that partition (previously we only labeled it as fat32 in the partition table; now we actually build one).
-F32 — a flag specifically telling mkfs.vfat to use the FAT32 variant. (Because some times it uses FAT16)
-n UBUNTU — sets the volume label (the name you'd see in a file manager) to "UBUNTU". Purely cosmetic, just for your convenience.
/dev/sdX1 — the target: partition 1 specifically, not the whole disk.


See the scripts1.txt for the next steps
